I'm Chandrika Joshi, it's the 27th of March, 2024.
I've come to Crowley to interview Jaya Benwaja.
Your name?
Okay, my name is Jaya Benwaja.
I was born in Tanzania in 1943, on the 18th of March.
Where are you from?
Tanzania, in Srinyanga.
So you were born in Srinyanga, where did you grow up?
I grew up there.
I got married at the age of 15.
My mother was a woman.
We got married without seeing each other.
You got married without seeing each other?
We didn't see each other.
My husband's father, when he saw me, said that he was taking me with my brother's son.
So I decided to marry my husband's father.
I was 15 years old.
Then I got married at the age of 70.
You were married for two years.
I was married for two years.
With whom did you get married?
I got married to Gordon Waja.
I got married at the age of 70.
Then I came to Uganda.
My husband's uncle lived in my house.
We lived there for about a year.
After a year, we went to India.
Oh, right.
My mother-in-law, my husband's family lived there.
So your husband was born in India?
Yes, my husband was born in India in 1936.
My mother-in-law lived in a village near the old village.
It's called Paravada.
Paravada.
My husband lived there.
How old was your husband when he came to Uganda?
When he came to Uganda, he was 14 years old.
He was 14 years old.
My uncle lived in my house.
Then he gradually took up an education in Uganda.
In Uganda.
In Jhentia.
He was a good man.
He didn't like English.
My sister and I started working together.
We had a daughter in the garage.
She was also a laborer.
Just to learn.
Then she gradually started working in the garage.
After she learned, she got experience.
Then her grandson opened his own garage.
Okay.
So your marriage was his own garage?
Yes, it was his own garage.
He married me when he was 24 years old.
Okay.
He was 24 years old.
He opened his own garage.
It was a small garage.
There was only one person left to work with.
Then he started working.
Then he found work.
He found work.
When someone couldn't work, he called him.
He was a good man.
He was a good businessman.
He slowly got an expert position.
Then I went to a garage called Overseas Garage in Chinja.
I started working there.
Then slowly, I stayed at my uncle's house.
My husband was sad that we had to stay at my son's house.
Then we stayed at our son's house in a Brahmin's house.
Then my elder daughter Nita was born there.
After that, I was born in Jayesh.
Then Jayesh was about 4 years old.
After that, Shilpa was born.
Rupa was born in 1970.
We had 4 children.
Our life was very happy.
It was very good.
No one was bothering us.
If someone came from the garage, we would do the work.
We would wash clothes and do the work.
We would cook the food.
We were doing all that.
After that, it was 10 years ago.
10 years ago.
Yes, Uganda.
After 10 years, my mother came to Chinja.
She was a Prime Minister.
She came here.
I was 12 years old.
After that, she took over the entire area.
She took over Amina.
Did you get a job at that time?
Yes, I got a job.
I didn't get a job after that.
I told my mother that I would be there for a month.
She said that I would be there for 90 days.
Then the situation was very bad.
How did you feel?
I was very scared.
In Chinja?
In Chinja.
I was afraid that what would happen if someone came from the garage.
I was afraid that people from the army would come.
I was afraid that they would take away the things I had seen.
They would take away?
They would take away.
I was afraid of them.
They took away my gun.
Oh really?
Yes.
Once in Sanjana, my husband was living in a garage.
He said that the bullet of the gun had hit him.
Oh my God!
He fired the gun?
He fired the gun.
And the bullet hit him?
Yes, the bullet hit him.
After coming to Sanjana, he said that he didn't want to open the garage.
He didn't want to open the garage.
He stayed at home.
He didn't go out.
Then he declared that he didn't want to open the garage.
He didn't want to open the garage.
Then he told me that he wanted to take away the children.
Oh, right.
So, he took away my four children.
Where did he take away?
He took away them to England.
He said that the British passport holder left.
Your British passport?
Yes, my British passport.
And my brother Gautam?
He had a British passport.
Yes.
Then, my son's name was on my passport.
My son went with me.
Did you come alone?
Yes, I came alone.
With your son?
I came alone with my son.
Okay.
I came alone.
And then, the Ugandan refugees, they were very
ungrateful.
They took away the children from the plane.
They said all that.
We didn't know where to go.
Were you ungrateful?
Did you come alone?
No, we came to Stensted.
We came to Stensted.
From there, we received everyone.
There was a bus, a big hole.
Yes.
In Stensted.
We started giving warm clothes to everyone there.
Because warm clothes were not available.
No.
Coat, children's cap, scarf, boots, everything.
We started giving them everything.
Then, they took us.
We didn't know where to take them.
But we went there.
They took us to Wales.
Were you going to Wales?
We were going to Wales.
Okay.
There was a house there.
We took them there.
We took them to each family.
There was a house there.
The heating was going on.
Did you have any family with you?
Yes, my husband.
My husband's wife, his daughter-in-law,
his youngest son, and his son's wife, Shanti Bail.
He was with us.
Shanti Bail was with us.
He was our youngest brother.
We took them to the house.
How did you feel when you went to Wales?
We were so happy.
We were so peaceful.
We were so scared.
We were so worried about what would happen.
We wanted to go to Uganda,
but we were worried because we wanted to go there sometime.
So I got a lot of calls.
But we had been told that there was no arrivé.
There wasn't any correspondence from Uganda.
We had no access.
So we stayed in this house.
We drank from the South.
We would have tea, water, breakfast and all that.
We would eat all that.
Then we would go to a big canteen and have breakfast in the morning.
When did you come there?
I came there on October 7th.
So what did you do in the canteen?
We would go to the canteen every day.
In the morning we would have breakfast.
Cornflakes and bread.
We would eat a lot of things.
We would eat fish fingers.
We would eat fiber and other things.
We would eat dhokra.
But we didn't eat fish fingers.
Then slowly they started making tea for the Indians.
They started making tea.
They made it with cornflakes and rice and vegetables.
How long did you work there?
In the morning and evening.
We would go there at 5 pm.
They would go there at 5 pm.
My daughter was a nanny.
So they would put milk in her milk every morning.
They would put hot milk.
Because she was a nanny.
We would bring a lot of clothes.
We would bring clothes, clothes and everything.
Then we would camp for 3 months.
3 months.
Did you cook and make tea?
We would cook.
We would go to a big vineyard in Birmingham.
We would take a lot of potatoes and potatoes.
We would bring potatoes and potatoes.
We would make roti and stuff.
We would fill our stomachs and go to the vineyard.
This was your first Gujarati meal?
Yes, it was my first Gujarati meal.
Was it sweet?
Very much.
We ate a lot.
Then we were young.
Did you bring spices?
We brought everything from there.
From the vineyard?
From the vineyard.
We brought all the spices.
Then we went there.
We went to the camp.
We would stay there.
We would bring all the dishes.
Did you bring money?
We didn't know about the money.
We didn't know how to use the money in the camp.
Then we went to Uganda.
We would give money to the children.
I remember that there were four children.
They gave us 80 pence.
80 pence?
There were pens.
They didn't have pounds.
I think they were about five pounds.
What did you make with the potatoes?
We made potatoes, roti.
I had a mother-in-law.
I would bring rice for her.
She would eat rice.
How many people were there in this house?
There were four children and five of us.
They were...
Your cousins?
Yes, my cousins.
My mother-in-law.
Then my uncle.
Her husband.
Her son was Jhenti.
Jhenti's sister-in-law.
Her brother-in-law.
We called her sister.
We would stay there for 18 years.
When did Gordon come back?
When did he come back?
He came back about three months later.
Three months later?
Yes.
I told my sister that her husband Shanti was with them.
Oh God.
Did they have a deadline to leave?
No, they left two days ago.
Oh, they left then.
They left last time.
I don't know about the other people, but
I know that one of their friends,
he was a Brahmin,
he came first.
He had a brother.
Did they have a problem when they left?
They...
They would come by bus after they left.
They had a problem.
Did they have a problem when they left for Uganda?
I think they didn't have a problem.
Did they have a problem when they left?
No, they didn't have a problem.
There is a reason for that.
They didn't have a problem.
Their brother, Gordon,
They would take the people who were not in the plane to the coach to go to the airport.
They would come by bus after that.
We would get off at the coach.
At the end of the road.
We would take them inside.
I would take four children.
Then we would sit and they would say,
Parcel, parcel, parcel.
Oh really?
They would bring as many people as they could.
I had a few parcels with me.
We would sit there.
We would go to the airport when the war broke out.
There were so many people in the plane.
They would go one by one.
We would sit on the plane.
Did you sit on the plane for the first time?
Yes, for the first time.
We would travel in the plane.
We couldn't do any FOD.
We didn't know.
We would sit on the plane.
Then we would come there.
Did you arrange anything for the children?
Nothing else.
We would give them food.
They would go to play.
Yes, they would go to play.
We would go to school.
When the school was open,
people would go out to play.
They would sit on the seats.
It was a big game.
Then we would play at night.
We would arrange everything for the pregnant women.
We would arrange everything.
We would go to the camp.
Was it a big globe?
Yes, we would go there.
We would go there.
It was a memorable place.
We couldn't forget anything.
So you would go to the camp first.
Yes, we would go to the camp first.
When we left Uganda,
the camp was about to start.
It was right.
We would come to the camp after 2-3 days.
Then we would go to the home.
We would play.
Yes, yes.
We would play for 3 months.
3 months.
But we didn't have any problem in the camp.
Nothing.
Then they would ask me for an interview.
They asked me what I was doing.
I said I was doing the work of the garage.
I was working as a mechanic.
I was working with Peter.
Oh, right.
He was working on the electric stove.
He was making coal.
Oh, right.
So I was working on this.
What was he doing?
He was a mechanic.
Yes, he was a mechanic.
So I said,
I will smoke the well.
I put the smoke in the well.
There was the garage work.
I was working there.
Then,
I was working
under the
paint dress.
Under the paint dress.
There was a top swell
next to the paint dress.
Oh, top swell. Yes.
There was a garage in the top swell.
Yes.
This was the garage.
I was working there.
He was happy.
He said he liked the garage work.
He worked there.
Then he started working there.
So you started working before you got the house?
No, I got the house.
I got the house.
I got the paint dress.
I was a B.A. Welfare officer.
I took the paint dress to the house.
There, everything was ready.
6 plates.
Everything was ready.
6 paint, 6 plates.
The glass was ready.
Everything was ready.
The bedding, the blankets, everything.
Everything.
Then,
I gave everything to him.
Then we came there.
Then we settled there.
Then the children's school was going to be built.
The people there helped us.
There is a school down there.
There were only 4 children.
So we had to cross a road from the house to the school.
And the children were there.
How did you like the paint dress?
I liked it very much.
It was our own home.
We lived there.
But it was our own home.
Then the children came from all around.
And there was a photo in the paper.
First Ugandan refugees.
Right, okay.
They came to stay here.
Then there was...
Oh, Madwaiwa.
I saw in the paper that she was a chemist.
Punjabi.
What was her name?
She was a chemist.
Madwaiwa.
I read the name in the paper.
And I am a mother.
I am from Punjabi.
I know everything.
I went to Kottomai.
I didn't go to India because there was no Asian.
They said that the shop is just across the street.
If you do something, you will die here.
So I stayed there and settled there.
So Gautam Brother,
How did you get into this job?
He went to the garage.
He said, you know driving?
He said, yes, I know.
So he came here by car.
Oh, gosh. Really?
He took the car.
He said, I have a car.
For my children.
And for my wife.
I want to buy warm clothes.
I could have come from the camp.
But I had to buy more clothes.
I had to buy a coat.
So he said, Ponte Pristh.
Ponte Pristh.
There is a shop there.
You can go there.
I remember there was a small village there.
There was a village.
We used to buy clothes from there.
Really?
The first clothes were from the village.
And they used to bring 50 pounds
from Uganda.
So we used to bring some money and go to the camp.
All of us.
All the women.
But to get the benefit of the children,
we used to go straight to the post office.
We used to bring them.
The rent was only 4 pounds.
4 pounds.
10 pence bread and 10 pence milk.
Yes.
And the heating included?
The house was very hot.
No carpet.
But it was very fine.
Then we used to
spend time at home
with the children.
Then we used to bring TV.
We used to bring black and white TV.
The children used to watch.
Then we used to
slowly
bring the colour TV.
We used to bring the colour TV.
No sorry.
We used to bring the TV once.
They used to turn off the TV.
Oh no!
Then we used to bring the TV.
Then the children used to watch.
Yes.
Very much.
Then
the family used to come.
No one else came?
No one else came.
Brahmin family.
Oh, Amali family.
Yes.
The Brahmin family came.
I was very happy that someone came.
Someone from Gujarat came.
He was Indian.
I used to go with him
to the village.
And
it was really fine.
How old was Ria?
Yes.
She was
six years old.
Six years old.
Did you know the children?
The children were in the village.
They were very young.
We used to come here
and play with the children.
The children used to work here.
So I told my husband
to do everything for the work.
I went to work.
Then we settled here.
Then we
bought a house.
When was Crowley?
In 1979.
In 1979, Crowley.
Yes, end of
December.
How did you
come to Wales?
Because there was no work there.
It was difficult
to get work for the ladies.
And
for the children.
Because we didn't know the children.
We took them.
And we came here
with our own children.
Shanti and Bay.
So you didn't come alone.
Yes, we didn't come alone.
We didn't have a family.
That's why
we came here.
So in some respect
you said you lived in Rwanda.
At that time, you had
a small Indian family.
But you had to come alone.
Yes, we had to come alone.
And in Penrish
how did you
manage to
eat?
We used to bring
from Sparrow
some capsicum
some green chillies
some lotus leaves
some cauliflower
some spinach
and potatoes
and some other things.
And we used to
take some
from the vat
and we used to
take some from the mugs
and we used to do
this.
So you used to bring
from the vat?
Yes, from the vat.
We used to bring from Darwik.
We used to bring from there
from the vat.
We used to bring from there.
Then you came to Krolli
and
you bought your own house?
Yes,
we bought our own house.
We bought our own house.
And then
we gave
the money
to the deposit.
We had only that much
savings because
we came from Africa.
Oh, right, okay.
We had only that much.
Then we
took a mortgage of 25,000.
And then
we had to pay
interest.
Then
we started like that.
Did you do any work?
Yes, I
worked in
a cigarette factory
in Wales.
We made a filter
and it was so far
about 12-15 miles
away.
So I and my husband used to go out
by car and
drop us off at the bus stop.
Then we would go to Tapsville.
Then
they would come with us and
take us there.
That's how my work was going on.
And you worked in Krolli?
In Krolli
I didn't work for a year.
Because
it was very difficult to get a job.
Then my husband
went to the job center
and told him that he wanted to
see his wife's work.
So he
asked her to go to
the industrial estate.
There is a sweet factory there.
He said, go there. So we went there.
We went there.
He called me
inside
and took an interview.
He said,
what work do you know?
I said, I didn't
know anything.
I had told him in Wales
to add a cigarette
in the factory.
Then he said, I will tell you.
Then he
told me, sweet
factory. I don't know what
it was called. Fudge.
Fudge was made.
We would fill
everything in a tray
and stack it.
That's what I did.
Then
about
four years
I think.
Six years
later,
we went there.
Then the factory
got redundant.
Then
I thought
about what work
I should do.
Then I did
catering.
I got the work of catering.
We set up the tray.
Food, bread, salad
and everything was in the plane.
After all this
I thought, Saturday, Sunday
I should work from the children's school.
I should not do this
if I get another job.
There was a factory
next door.
I was making batteries.
I went there to ask.
I said, I want a job.
He said,
you want a job?
Do you have a job?
When do you want to start?
I said, right now.
I have a job
and I need to give a week's notice.
He said, yes, you give a notice
and then you come straight here.
Then the work will be ready.
Then I
got the work from the factory.
And you said you were going to work
from this day? Yes.
And you were not going to work on weekends?
Yes, I was not going to work on weekends.
I was going to work on weekends.
That's why I got the job.
Then from there
I got the work
from the Duracell factory.
That too
was redundant.
It was not
redundant.
If I worked,
I would get only 4,000-4,500 pounds
in a short period of time.
And from the sweet factory
I would get 2,000-2,000 pounds.
Then I said,
when will I get the work
or not?
Then the other job
was
the Beecham factory.
There was a factory in Beecham.
And in the factory
they made all the medicines.
They made animals
and humans.
So there
I got the work
and the interviews.
But they
knew that I didn't know
English.
I knew English but
I didn't know how to write.
I asked them
if I could speak in English.
They said,
you can start from tomorrow.
I worked there for 18 years.
In Beecham for 18 years?
Yes, in Beecham for 18 years.
Then the factory
joined with
another company
Glexo.
It joined with Glexo.
It joined.
And then
all the medicines
that were made
were made
by the animal health company.
One part.
And the other part
that was left
where the medicines were made
was made in the factory.
So there
I worked for 18 years.
After 18 years
I retired.
Retired.
You think
if you had lived in Uganda
you would have worked?
No, you wouldn't have.
No, no.
How would you have lived?
Oops.
So if you had lived in Uganda
would you have worked?
No, you wouldn't have.
You would have spent so much experience.
That people
work,
women work,
and so on.
Plus education wise.
The children got quite educated.
In Uganda
the children who were earning money
were also coming to get education.
And this was also
a benefit.
This was also a benefit.
Because you had free education
in this country?
Yes, free education.
Earlier
they gave scholarships.
Do you know?
And then
I had a son
who got educated.
The child was like his sister.
And when the time came
they got married.
Four children were there.
No, no, no. They got married.
They got married.
How many grandchildren do you have?
We all have nine.
Nine grandchildren?
Yes, yes.
Happy life?
Very happy.
I had a husband
who passed away
at the age of 87.
Oh, he died at the age of 87.
Last year, right?
Yes, yes.
This is my story.
This is your story, yes?
Yes.